docs/instrumentation/django.md, before:

---
id: django
title: Django OpenTelemetry Instrumentation
description: Instrument your Django application with OpenTelemetry and send data to SigNoz

---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import InstrumentationFAQ from '../shared/instrumentation-faq.md'


This document contains instructions on how to set up OpenTelemetry instrumentation in your Django applications. OpenTelemetry, also known as OTel for short, is an open source observability framework that can help you generate and collect telemetry data - traces, metrics, and logs from your Django application.

Once the telemetry data is collected, you can configure an exporter to send the data to SigNoz.

There are three major steps to using OpenTelemetry:

- Instrumenting your Django application with OpenTelemetry
- Configuring exporter to send data to SigNoz
- Validating that configuration to ensure that data is being sent as expected.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/otel_python_instrumentation.webp" alt="OpenTelemetry helps to generate and collect telemetry data from your application which is then sent to an observability backend like SigNoz"/>
    <figcaption><i>OpenTelemetry helps generate and collect telemetry data from Python applications which can then be sent to SigNoz for storage, visualization, and analysis.</i></figcaption>
</figure>

<br></br>

Let’s understand how to download, install, and run OpenTelemetry in Django.

## Requirements

- Python 3.6 or newer

- for Django, you must define `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE`correctly. If your project is called `mysite`, something like following should work:

```jsx
export DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE=mysite.settings
```

  Please refer the official [Django docs](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.10/topics/settings/#designating-the-settings) for more details.

## Traces

You can use OpenTelemetry to send your traces directly to SigNoz. OpenTelemetry provides a handy distro in Python that can help you get started with automatic instrumentation. We recommend using it to get started quickly.

### Steps to auto-instrument Django app for traces

1. **Create a virtual environment**<br></br>
    
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv instrumentation_env
    source instrumentation_env/bin/activate
    ```
    
2. **Install the OpenTelemetry dependencies**<br></br>
    
    ```bash
    pip install opentelemetry-distro
    pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp
    ```
    
    The dependencies included are briefly explained below:

    `opentelemetry-distro` - The distro provides a mechanism to automatically configure some of the more common options for users. It helps to get started with OpenTelemetry auto-instrumentation quickly. 
    
    `opentelemetry-exporter-otlp` - This library provides a convenient way to install all supported OpenTelemetry Collector Exporters. You will need an exporter to send the data to SigNoz.
    
    :::note
    💡 The `opentelemetry-exporter-otlp` is a convenient way to install all supported OpenTelemetry exporters. Currently it installs:
    - opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-http
    - opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc
    
    We recommend using the http exporter for sending data to SigNoz.
    :::
    
3. **Add automatic instrumentation**<br></br>
     The below command inspects the dependencies of your application and installs the instrumentation packages relevant for your Django application.
    
    ```bash
    opentelemetry-bootstrap --action=install
    ```


4. **Run your application**<br></br>
     In the final run command, you can configure environment variables and flags. Flags for exporters:<br></br>
     HTTP: otlp_proto_http<br></br>
     gRPC: otlp_proto_grpc<br></br>

     We recommend using the `otlp_proto_http` exporter.
     
     For running your application, there are a few things that you need to keep in mind. Below are the notes:
    :::note
     Don’t run app in reloader/hot-reload mode as it breaks instrumentation. For example, if you use `export FLASK_ENV=development`, it enables the reloader mode which breaks OpenTelemetry isntrumentation.
    :::

    
    For running applications with application servers which are based on [pre fork model](#running-applications-with-gunicorn-uwsgi), like Gunicorn, uWSGI you have to add a post_fork hook or a @postfork decorator in your configuration.
     
     To start sending data to SigNoz, use the following run command:

     ```bash
     OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=<service_name> OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT="http://<IP of SigNoz Backend>:4318"  opentelemetry-instrument --traces_exporter otlp_proto_http --metrics_exporter otlp_proto_http <your run command>
     ```

     *<service_name>* is the name of service you want

     *<your_run_command>* can be `python3 app.py` or `python manage.py runserver --noreload`

     `IP of SigNoz backend` is the IP of the machine where you installed SigNoz. If you have installed SigNoz on `localhost`, the endpoint will be `http://localhost:4318`.
     
    :::note
     The port numbers are 4317 and 4318 for the gRPC and HTTP exporters respectively. Remember to allow incoming requests to port **4317**/**4318** of machine where SigNoz backend is hosted.
    :::
     

### Validating instrumentation by checking for traces

With your application running, you can verify that you’ve instrumented your application with OpenTelemetry correctly by confirming that tracing data is being reported to SigNoz.

To do this, you need to ensure that your application generates some data. Applications will not produce traces unless they are being interacted with, and OpenTelemetry will often buffer data before sending. So you need to interact with your application and wait for some time to see your tracing data in SigNoz.

Validate your traces in SigNoz:

1. Trigger an action in your app that generates a web request. Hit the endpoint a number of times to generate some data. Then, wait for some time.
2. In SigNoz, open the `Services` tab. Hit the `Refresh` button on the top right corner, and your application should appear in the list of `Applications`.
3. Go to the `Traces` tab, and apply relevant filters to see your application’s traces.

You might see other dummy applications if you’re using SigNoz for the first time. You can remove it by following the docs [here](https://signoz.io/docs/operate/docker-standalone/#remove-the-sample-application).

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/opentelemetry_python_app_instrumented.webp" alt="Python Application in the list of services being monitored in SigNoz"/>
    <figcaption><i>Python Application in the list of services being monitored in SigNoz</i></figcaption></figure>
<br></br>

## Database Instrumentation

Make sure that the DB client library you are using has the corresponding instrumentation library, and the version of the DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry.

### MongoDB

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your MongoDB database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For MongoDB, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymongo`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### Redis

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your Redis database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For Redis, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-redis`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### MySQL

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your MySQL database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For MySQL, we have two isntrumentation libraries:

- opentelemetry-instrumentation-mysql
- opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### Postgres

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your PostgreSQL database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For Postgres, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

:::note

`psycopg2-binary` is not supported by opentelemetry auto instrumentation libraries as it is not recommended for production use. Please use `psycopg2` to see DB calls also in your trace data in SigNoz

:::


<p>&nbsp;</p>

## Running applications with Gunicorn, uWSGI

For application servers which are based on pre fork model like Gunicorn, uWSGI you have to add a `post_fork` hook or a `@postfork` decorator in your configuration.

Check this [documentation](https://opentelemetry-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/fork-process-model/README.html) from OpenTelemetry on how to set it up.

[Here's](https://github.com/SigNoz/opentelemetry-python/tree/main/docs/examples/fork-process-model) a working example where we have configured a gunicorn server with `post_fork` hook.
  
<p>&nbsp;</p>


## Troubleshooting your installation

#### Spans are not being reported

If spans are not being reported to SigNoz, try enabling debug exporter which writes the json formatted trace data to console.

`opentelemetry-instrument --traces_exporter otlp_proto_http,console --metrics_exporter otlp_proto_http,console <your run command>`:

```json
{
    "name": "alice",
    "context": {
        "trace_id": "0xedb7caf0c8b082a9578460a201759193",
        "span_id": "0x57cf7eee198e1fed",
        "trace_state": "[]"
    },
    "kind": "SpanKind.INTERNAL",
    "parent_id": null,
    "start_time": "2022-03-27T14:55:18.804758Z",
    "end_time": "2022-03-27T14:55:18.804805Z",
    "status": {
        "status_code": "UNSET"
    },
    "attributes": {},
    "events": [],
    "links": [],
    "resource": {
        "telemetry.sdk.language": "python",
        "telemetry.sdk.name": "opentelemetry",
        "telemetry.sdk.version": "1.10.0",
        "service.name": "my-service"
    }
}
```

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<!-- #### If DB Calls are not reported in spans

Ensure you have the correct opentelemetry instrumentations:

- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2/) for Postgres
- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql/) for MySQL
- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-sqlite3](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-sqlite3/) for SQLite3
- Complete list [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation) -->


<InstrumentationFAQ />

Commit message:

[docs] Trouble Shooting - when using SQLite3
when using sqlite3 as a database in django, error message occur(django.db.utils.ProgrammingError: Base Connection.__init__ not called.)
to solve this, setting environment value is working (OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS=sqlite3)
I referred site(https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/issues/1179#issuecomment-1175043456)

docs/instrumentation/django.md, after:

---
id: django
title: Django OpenTelemetry Instrumentation
description: Instrument your Django application with OpenTelemetry and send data to SigNoz

---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import InstrumentationFAQ from '../shared/instrumentation-faq.md'


This document contains instructions on how to set up OpenTelemetry instrumentation in your Django applications. OpenTelemetry, also known as OTel for short, is an open source observability framework that can help you generate and collect telemetry data - traces, metrics, and logs from your Django application.

Once the telemetry data is collected, you can configure an exporter to send the data to SigNoz.

There are three major steps to using OpenTelemetry:

- Instrumenting your Django application with OpenTelemetry
- Configuring exporter to send data to SigNoz
- Validating that configuration to ensure that data is being sent as expected.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/otel_python_instrumentation.webp" alt="OpenTelemetry helps to generate and collect telemetry data from your application which is then sent to an observability backend like SigNoz"/>
    <figcaption><i>OpenTelemetry helps generate and collect telemetry data from Python applications which can then be sent to SigNoz for storage, visualization, and analysis.</i></figcaption>
</figure>

<br></br>

Let’s understand how to download, install, and run OpenTelemetry in Django.

## Requirements

- Python 3.6 or newer

- for Django, you must define `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE`correctly. If your project is called `mysite`, something like following should work:

```jsx
export DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE=mysite.settings
```

  Please refer the official [Django docs](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.10/topics/settings/#designating-the-settings) for more details.

## Traces

You can use OpenTelemetry to send your traces directly to SigNoz. OpenTelemetry provides a handy distro in Python that can help you get started with automatic instrumentation. We recommend using it to get started quickly.

### Steps to auto-instrument Django app for traces

1. **Create a virtual environment**<br></br>
    
    ```bash
    python3 -m venv instrumentation_env
    source instrumentation_env/bin/activate
    ```
    
2. **Install the OpenTelemetry dependencies**<br></br>
    
    ```bash
    pip install opentelemetry-distro
    pip install opentelemetry-exporter-otlp
    ```
    
    The dependencies included are briefly explained below:

    `opentelemetry-distro` - The distro provides a mechanism to automatically configure some of the more common options for users. It helps to get started with OpenTelemetry auto-instrumentation quickly. 
    
    `opentelemetry-exporter-otlp` - This library provides a convenient way to install all supported OpenTelemetry Collector Exporters. You will need an exporter to send the data to SigNoz.
    
    :::note
    💡 The `opentelemetry-exporter-otlp` is a convenient way to install all supported OpenTelemetry exporters. Currently it installs:
    - opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-http
    - opentelemetry-exporter-otlp-proto-grpc
    
    We recommend using the http exporter for sending data to SigNoz.
    :::
    
3. **Add automatic instrumentation**<br></br>
     The below command inspects the dependencies of your application and installs the instrumentation packages relevant for your Django application.
    
    ```bash
    opentelemetry-bootstrap --action=install
    ```


4. **Run your application**<br></br>
     In the final run command, you can configure environment variables and flags. Flags for exporters:<br></br>
     HTTP: otlp_proto_http<br></br>
     gRPC: otlp_proto_grpc<br></br>

     We recommend using the `otlp_proto_http` exporter.
     
     For running your application, there are a few things that you need to keep in mind. Below are the notes:
    :::note
     Don’t run app in reloader/hot-reload mode as it breaks instrumentation. For example, if you use `export FLASK_ENV=development`, it enables the reloader mode which breaks OpenTelemetry isntrumentation.
    :::

    
    For running applications with application servers which are based on [pre fork model](#running-applications-with-gunicorn-uwsgi), like Gunicorn, uWSGI you have to add a post_fork hook or a @postfork decorator in your configuration.
     
     To start sending data to SigNoz, use the following run command:

     ```bash
     OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=<service_name> OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT="http://<IP of SigNoz Backend>:4318"  opentelemetry-instrument --traces_exporter otlp_proto_http --metrics_exporter otlp_proto_http <your run command>
     ```

     *<service_name>* is the name of service you want

     *<your_run_command>* can be `python3 app.py` or `python manage.py runserver --noreload`

     `IP of SigNoz backend` is the IP of the machine where you installed SigNoz. If you have installed SigNoz on `localhost`, the endpoint will be `http://localhost:4318`.
     
    :::note
     The port numbers are 4317 and 4318 for the gRPC and HTTP exporters respectively. Remember to allow incoming requests to port **4317**/**4318** of machine where SigNoz backend is hosted.
    :::
     

### Validating instrumentation by checking for traces

With your application running, you can verify that you’ve instrumented your application with OpenTelemetry correctly by confirming that tracing data is being reported to SigNoz.

To do this, you need to ensure that your application generates some data. Applications will not produce traces unless they are being interacted with, and OpenTelemetry will often buffer data before sending. So you need to interact with your application and wait for some time to see your tracing data in SigNoz.

Validate your traces in SigNoz:

1. Trigger an action in your app that generates a web request. Hit the endpoint a number of times to generate some data. Then, wait for some time.
2. In SigNoz, open the `Services` tab. Hit the `Refresh` button on the top right corner, and your application should appear in the list of `Applications`.
3. Go to the `Traces` tab, and apply relevant filters to see your application’s traces.

You might see other dummy applications if you’re using SigNoz for the first time. You can remove it by following the docs [here](https://signoz.io/docs/operate/docker-standalone/#remove-the-sample-application).

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/docs/opentelemetry_python_app_instrumented.webp" alt="Python Application in the list of services being monitored in SigNoz"/>
    <figcaption><i>Python Application in the list of services being monitored in SigNoz</i></figcaption></figure>
<br></br>

## Database Instrumentation

Make sure that the DB client library you are using has the corresponding instrumentation library, and the version of the DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry.

### MongoDB

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your MongoDB database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For MongoDB, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymongo`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### Redis

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your Redis database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For Redis, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-redis`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### MySQL

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your MySQL database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For MySQL, we have two isntrumentation libraries:

- opentelemetry-instrumentation-mysql
- opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

### Postgres

You can use  `opentelemetry-distro` to initialize instrumentation for your PostgreSQL database calls. You need to ensure that the version of your DB client library is supported by OpenTelemetry. For Postgres, the instrumentation library is `opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2`.

You can check the supported versions [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation).

:::note

`psycopg2-binary` is not supported by opentelemetry auto instrumentation libraries as it is not recommended for production use. Please use `psycopg2` to see DB calls also in your trace data in SigNoz

:::

### SQLite3

When you use SQLite3 in Django for test or demo, You can encounter error message like below.
```
django.db.utils.ProgrammingError: Base Connection.__init__ not called.
```

To solve this issue, you can set environment value.
```
OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS=sqlite3
```

Or you can add this to run command:
```
OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS=sqlite3 OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=<service_name> OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT="http://<IP of SigNoz Backend>:4318"  opentelemetry-instrument --traces_exporter otlp_proto_http --metrics_exporter otlp_proto_http <your run command>
```

Please refer [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/issues/1179#issuecomment-1175043456)

<p>&nbsp;</p>

## Running applications with Gunicorn, uWSGI

For application servers which are based on pre fork model like Gunicorn, uWSGI you have to add a `post_fork` hook or a `@postfork` decorator in your configuration.

Check this [documentation](https://opentelemetry-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/fork-process-model/README.html) from OpenTelemetry on how to set it up.

[Here's](https://github.com/SigNoz/opentelemetry-python/tree/main/docs/examples/fork-process-model) a working example where we have configured a gunicorn server with `post_fork` hook.
  
<p>&nbsp;</p>


## Troubleshooting your installation

#### Spans are not being reported

If spans are not being reported to SigNoz, try enabling debug exporter which writes the json formatted trace data to console.

`opentelemetry-instrument --traces_exporter otlp_proto_http,console --metrics_exporter otlp_proto_http,console <your run command>`:

```json
{
    "name": "alice",
    "context": {
        "trace_id": "0xedb7caf0c8b082a9578460a201759193",
        "span_id": "0x57cf7eee198e1fed",
        "trace_state": "[]"
    },
    "kind": "SpanKind.INTERNAL",
    "parent_id": null,
    "start_time": "2022-03-27T14:55:18.804758Z",
    "end_time": "2022-03-27T14:55:18.804805Z",
    "status": {
        "status_code": "UNSET"
    },
    "attributes": {},
    "events": [],
    "links": [],
    "resource": {
        "telemetry.sdk.language": "python",
        "telemetry.sdk.name": "opentelemetry",
        "telemetry.sdk.version": "1.10.0",
        "service.name": "my-service"
    }
}
```

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<!-- #### If DB Calls are not reported in spans

Ensure you have the correct opentelemetry instrumentations:

- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-psycopg2/) for Postgres
- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-pymysql/) for MySQL
- [opentelemetry-instrumentation-sqlite3](https://pypi.org/project/opentelemetry-instrumentation-sqlite3/) for SQLite3
- Complete list [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python-contrib/tree/main/instrumentation) -->


<InstrumentationFAQ />
